The Great Mosque of Damascus in Syria, is the oldest surviving mosque, and is still being used today.
Completed around 716, the mosque features a vast sundrenched arcaded courtyard. Lavish decorations ornament the courtyard interior.
The arcade wall on the west includes an intriguing panel of glass and marble mosaics of a landscape.
Beautiful mosaics ornament the archways but the panel on the wall behind them is especially elaborate.
It is a panorama of a landscape, perhaps real, perhaps imagined, or maybe both.
It includes monumental buildings and village-like groups of smaller buildings;
they are surrounded by oversized trees, regularly planted along a river that runs the length of the panel.
The 10th century traveller and geographer al-Muqaddasi, who visited over 300 years after it was built wrote,
“The Mosque of Damascus is the fairest of any that the Muslims now hold ...
Even to the very ceiling are mosaics of various colors and in gold, showing figures of trees and towns”
The mosaics are made with cubes of coloured and gold leaf glass, marble and mother of pearl.
Green and blue are the favourite colours for the mosaic pieces, which are set against a shimmering gold background.
The flowing river at the bottom spans across the entire panel.
Along the river banks, enormous trees grow dwarfing the cluster of buildings they surround.
Trees frame the next set of buildings, which include a large curved structure surrounding a grassy area.
Behind it are trees, a cluster of buildings with towers and still more trees. The scene is more landscaped than natural.
A very large, symmetrical building appears next. On both ends of this section is a two-storey pillared building with a clam shell design.
Chains of pearls hang between the slender columns. Two gazebos side by side, with pitched roofs, are at the centre.
Large trees tower over the monument. The building is part of the landscape and the landscape is part of the building.
The river beneath continues to flow.
Further along, is a curious four-columned pavilion with a pitched roof. Vines twirl around the pillars.
Very similar scenes are found in the famous ancient Roman city of Pompeii,
which means the mosaics of the Great Mosque of Damascus are part of a centuries-long, shared tradition of artmaking
in the multicultural Ancient and early Medieval Mediterranean.
The end of the panel has more clusters of buildings. They may be palace complexes or townscapes.
It’s hard to believe that this 37m long mosaic panel was hidden under whitewash for many years and only rediscovered in 1929, when the building was restored.
Who were the artists who made this elaborate mosaic and decorated other parts of the mosque?
One tantalizing account from the mid 11th century says the Christian Byzantine emperor
sent 100,000 pieces of gold, 40 mule loads of mosaics and 1000 labourers, but this has been questioned.
Some say Egyptian mosaicists from Alexandria worked with Syrian artisans to make the mosaic.
Do the mosaics depict gardens or nature? Are the places real or imagined? Is it Damascus, a city which sits by the Barada river
and was surrounded by gardens? Is it Alexandria by the Nile? Or, is it paradise as described in the Quran?
Whatever the case, the Landscape Panorama mosaic of the Great Mosque of Damascus continues to fascinate and inspire its many visitors.